Now let's look at using version control systems with Kanban, and in particular,
branching and merging.
Now let's go through an example of using a version control system with Kanban.
So on the left,
we have a typical Kanban backlog with cards organized by
priority 1, 2, 3, and some nice to haves.
So if I'm a resource in the first value stream step and then I run an example,
it is specify, I pull a work item from the priority 1 backlog.
I may choose to use the Kanban work item ID as the potential branch name.
Now depending on how automated you are and if you are using separate
systems, one for Kanban and one from version control, these should be
linked electronically or by name of course.
Now I use the VCS to create a branch from the main branch named WI456
for the Kanban work item 456. So now I am all set to begin development
on the Kanban work item 456, and I'm using the branch name WI456.
Merging from mainline to your dev branch.
Here is our mainline version control code.
Think of this like a timeline, it is the pristine production code.
There is no other representation of what is in production, period.
So on Day 1 say we're going to create a new branch.
We will name the branch WI456 like I mentioned on my previous example.
So now on Day 1,
you are developing your current work item assignment in your own branch.
Your branch, that is, your work will move forward with time.
Now, on Day 2, the mainline was updated by a merge up,
if you will, by user X. We will talk more about
merge ups in a minute, but for now,
the production mainline of code has changed since you last did a merge down.
So a good VC system,
a good version control system should alert you. On Day 3, you
are informed of this change to the mainline,
either by an email or maybe an alert from your VCS, and you
should therefore merge down into your branch,
compile, and build, and validate before you proceed further on your work.
Sometimes this is known as rebasing.
Then on Day 5, the mainline codebase is updated again, but this time by user Y.
You are informed of this change in the mainline either by
an email or maybe an alert from your VCS and you merge
down into your branch again.
Compile and build and validate before you proceed further on your work.
As you can see, you might be pretty busy refreshing or rebasing your branch.
Here is a tip, don't wait until you have a ton of rebasing work to do.
Typically, your team will discuss and agree on your rebasing policies.
Follow your team's policies.
The longer your work takes to develop,
the more likely that other merges into the main line will take place.
If you're Version Control tool is capable of alerting you when the
parent code base, and in this case, the main line, has been updated,
then you would know you have an extra task to do. Again, don't wait to
the end of your task to merge, build, and validate.
You will regret it. Whenever you are alerted, do a merge down,
rebase your code, and keep working because you never know what
you'll find and that's the whole point of this process is to
find issues and errors earlier.
We want to move left upstream and find things earlier.
Would you create a new branch for each work item?
I say it depends.
Here are a few rules of thumb.
Well, don't have too many branches too much to keep track of.
Don't have too few branches where maybe you have 10
developers all working in the same branch, but your team
will figure out what works best.
I think these decisions are environmental, that is
the people, skills, type of work,
the culture, and other attributes, but I do recommend having a branch between
the main or mainline branch and the dev work item branches.
For some of my examples,
I show branching off of the main directly to the work item.
That is really to keep the slide simpler, but I do believe you
need one between the main and the work item.
I like having a release branch or multiple release branches.
You see, releases come and go, that is good, but if you have a dev branch,
well, that'll hang around forever and some issues may arise over time.
The only branch, if you will,
that I want to hang around forever is the main or mainline code base.
Remember, one or more devs can work within the same branch,
so not all work items pulled into the value stream may require its own branch.
Lastly,
these rules of thumb seem to work well in the environments I have managed,
but there is no one way to do anything.
What is important, though,
is that you and your team have agreed on what your best
practices are for branching and merging and,
for that matter, the entire use of your version control system.
Merging down is merging code from a parent branch
into a work in progress branch.
Here are the rules of thumb when you are the developer and you need to merge
down from the mainline or other higher level branch. It is a best practice to
merge these changes from the related parent branch into your working branch
frequently. Merging new changes into the branch helps decrease the likelihood of
any complexity of a merge conflict.
Your slogan should be merge early and merge often.
Don't wait until you are all done with your branch before you merge down.
You may have a ton of work to do and many conflicts. Use branches for
spikes too. Developers create branches to experiment in isolation, this
keeps the overall product stable.
It is a best practice to update these working branches
with changes in related parent branches.
If your work item was a validate task or a spike task and you have your results,
you could either kill off the branch or keep it around in case other
developers may need to get to your code and reuse it.
Use meaningful naming conventions,
especially if the VCS and the Kanban management system are
two distinct tools and you need to connect the dots by
strictly following naming conventions.
For example,
work item 123 in a Kanban system would be a branch maybe WI123 in
the VCS. Branches shouldn't be around forever.
Branches should only live as long as necessary, otherwise,
you'll have a million of them.
Having too many branches adds complexity.
This increases the risk of using or merging to the wrong branch.
Use branching policies.
The activity of branching should have a single policy for who can
make changes, when builds occur, what tests to run,
etc.
This should not be just some random activity.
Get it all figured out for your team and follow your policies.
All branches in the original mainline have owners. Appoint a single owner
for each branch to resolve any issues that may arise.
This puts someone clearly in charge and there is no fuzz on who is responsible.
Usually only leads, PMs, or version control managers
will make branches or do the merge ups.
All devs typically may do the merge downs, it depends on
your environment, and your situation,
and your policies. Relate branches to releases or milestones.
With most projects, releases have to be built while development continues.
Create branches to isolate a release so future
development can continue in parallel.
So if a team is working on release four,
there is nothing to say that release five isn't also
underway and maybe even release six.
You could decide on what's best. Then all devs working on release four would have their own child branches off of release four.